---
layout: post
title: Why Care about 2-Categories?
tags:
  - 
---

Hey all! It's been a few months. I've been busy with a _bunch_ of fun math
stuff and honestly I have so much to write about that it's been hard to 
write anything! As a quick advertisement, I've been writing some shorter
form stuff on my [mastodon][1], which has been super rewarding. 

I've been learning a _ton_ of cool math, and I think I've been pretending
to be a geometer for so long that it's starting to become true! I'm doing
a reading course with [Brian Collier][2] on [Morse Theory][3][^3],
and I'm getting into [Symplectic Geometry][4] with an eye towards 
[Fukaya Categories][5]. 

Then I'm also working on an analysis of the game of [clue][6] using
[modal logic][7]. I have a blog post that's very nearly done which 
explains the basics of the analysis, but I still have some computations
to do before I can sleep soundly. That's worth looking forward to, though,
I've had a lot of fun working on it!

Between all this fun math, and a couple personal things going on, I have 
a lot of balls in the air right now. But I also have
a lot of blog posts planned as soon as I have time to write them down!

Today, though, I want to write a short post on a realization that I had
recently. For a while now I've known (intellectually) why we should care
about 2-categories, but a few days ago it really clicked into place for me,
and I wanted to share the explanation with all of you ^_^.

---

First, recall the <span class=defn>category of categories</span> 
$\mathfrak{Cat}$:
We have categories $\mathcal{A}$ as objects, and functors 
$F : \mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$ as arrows. 
But there's more structure here, since we also have natural transformations
$\theta : F \Rightarrow G$ between any two arrows.

Notice also that this structure isn't incidental to $\mathfrak{Cat}$!
The "correct" notion of sameness for two categories $\mathcal{A}$ and
$\mathcal{B}$ is _not_ isomorphism[^5] -- it's equivalence, which
relies on the natural transformations. So in order to make $\mathfrak{Cat}$ 
function in the way we want it to, we really should be keeping the natural
transformations as part of its defining data.

We formalize this by defining a (strict) <span class=defn>2-Category</span> as

- A set[^6] of _objects_, also called <span class=defn>0-cells</span>,
    written $\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{B}$, etc.
- Between any two objects, a set of arrows, or <span class=defn>1-cells</span>,
    written $f : \mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$
- Between any two arrows $f,g : \mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$, a set of 
    natural transformations, or <span class=defn>2-cells</span> 
    $\theta : f \Rightarrow g$

We will always use single arrows "$\to$" to denote 1-cells and double 
arrows "$\Rightarrow$" to denote 2-cells.

Of course, there should be identity arrows for each object, and identity 
natural transformations for each arrow, as well as various kinds of composition.
For a real definition, you could see the [nlab][8], but imo this page
is particularly obtuse. Instead I think Kelly and Street's 
[_Review of the Elements of 2-Categories_][9] is a good first reference.

A slick definition, if you want one, is that a (strict) 2-category is a 
category _enriched in categories_. That is, a 2-category is a set of 
objects $\mathcal{A}$, $\mathcal{B}$, etc. and instead of a mere _set_
of arrows, we actually have a full _category_ of arrows 
$\mathsf{Arr}(\mathcal{A}, \mathcal{B})$ between any two objects! 
The objects of $\mathsf{Arr}(\mathcal{A}, \mathcal{B})$ are the 1-cells
$\mathcal{A} \to \mathcal{B}$ and the arrows between two 1-cells $f,g$
are the 2-cells.

Lots of "categories of categories" naturally form 2-categories in this way.
For instance, we have:

- The 2-category of categories, functors, and natural transformations
- The 2-category of categories with finite products, functors preserving
    finite products, and all natural transformations
- The 2-category of categories with finite (co)limits, functors preserving
    (co)limits, and all natural transformations
- The 2-category of symmetric monoidal categories, symmetric monoidal functors,
    and symmetric monoidal natural transformations
- The 2-category of topoi, geometric functors, and [geometric transformations][10]

but there are also 2-categories of a different flavor. For instance

- The 2-category of topological spaces, continuous maps, and homotopies

Moreover, to any particular topological space $X$, we can associate its
<span class=defn>Fundamental 2-Groupoid</span>, which is the 2-category of
points of $X$, paths in $X$, and homotopies between paths in $X$.

<div class=boxed markdown=1>
Show that a 2-category with a single 0-cell is exactly a (strict) 
monoidal category! See [here][11] for a silly digression.
</div>

---

This is neat, and there's lots of natural examples, but
why should we _care_? 

The hint comes from the fact that natural transformations, the 2-cells in
these (2-)categories allow us to properly encode the correct notion of "sameness".
For instance, equivalence of categories, homotopy equivalence of spaces, etc.
We might suspect that other categorical constructions might need to be modified
in order to make them play nicely with equivalences where we would normally
expect isomorphism. 

For instance, we know that there's an informal duality between 
syntax and semantics (see [here][12] for an old blog post where I 
talk _very_ informally about this). How might we try to make this duality
precise in some special case?

Following Lawvere, our "syntax" will be a category $\mathcal{C}$ with structure, 
and our "semantics" will be functors $\mathcal{C} \to \mathsf{Set}$ which 
preserve that structure. We call such functors <span class=defn>Models</span>
of the theory $\mathcal{C}$[^7].

We will work in the setting of [essentially algebraic theories][13].
Our syntax will be given by a category $\mathcal{C}$ with finite limits,
and a model will be a finite limit preserving functor $\mathcal{C} \to \mathsf{Set}$.

So then, to any finite limit category $\mathcal{C}$ we associate a new 
category 

$$\mathsf{Mod}(\mathcal{C}) = \mathsf{Lex}(\mathcal{C},\mathsf{Set})$$ 

of (set valued) $\mathcal{C}$-models 
(read: finite limit functors $\mathcal{C} \to \mathsf{Set}$)
and homomorphisms
(read: natural transformations between these functors)[^8].

One can show that $\mathsf{Mod}(\mathcal{C})$ is always 
[locally finitely presentable][14], and that the relevant functors
(the so-called <span class=defn>Algebraic Functors</span>)
are those which preserve limits and [filtered colimits][15].

Now it should come as no surprise that there is a category whose 
objects are locally finitely presentable categories, and whose 
arrows are the algebraic functors. Moreover, 
we get a functor 

$$
\mathsf{Mod}(-) :
\left \{ 
  \begin{gathered}
  \text{finite limit categories} \\
  \text{and finite limit functors}
  \end{gathered}
\right \}^\text{op}
\to
\left \{ 
  \begin{gathered}
  \text{locally finitely presentable categories} \\
  \text{and algebraic functors} 
  \end{gathered}
\right \}
$$

This is usually abbreviated 

$$
\mathsf{Mod}(-) : \mathsf{Lex}^\text{op} \to \mathsf{LFP}
$$

<br><br>

Dually, fix some LFP category $\mathcal{A}$. 

An object $X \in \mathcal{A}$ is called 
<span class=defn>Finitely Presented</span> if the 
representable functor $\mathcal{A}(X,-)$ preserves filtered colimits.
In case $\mathcal{A}$ is a "classical" category of algebras 
(groups, rings, modules, etc.) then this notion of "finitely presented"
agrees with the usual notion of "finitely many generators and relations".

Now write $\mathcal{A}_{fp}$ for the full subcategory on the finitely 
presented objects. We have another functor

$$
(-)_{fp}^\text{op} : \mathsf{LFP}^\text{op} \to \mathsf{Lex}
$$

<br><br>

We would like to say that $\mathsf{Mod}(-)$ and $(-)_{fp}^\text{op}$ are 
inverses in some sense, so that $\mathsf{Lex}$ and $\mathsf{LFP}$ are 
antiequivalent, and syntax is dual (in this precise sense!) to semantics.

Unfortunately, we run into an issue. In order for $\mathsf{Lex}$ and $\mathsf{LFP}$
to be antiequivalent, we would want a natural isomorphism 

$$
(\mathsf{Lex}(-,\mathsf{Set}))_{fp}^\text{op} \cong \text{Id}_{\mathsf{Lex}}
$$

That is, we want a uniform way to witness

$$
(\mathsf{Lex}(\mathcal{C},\mathsf{Set}))_{fp}^\text{op} \cong \mathcal{C}
$$

as objects of $\mathsf{Lex}$.

But remember that these are _categories_! They are almost never isomorphic!
Instead we usually ask for two categories to be _equivalent_.

---

For the Lawvere Theory story, check Adamek and Rosicky (sp?)'s 
_Locally Presentable and Accessible Categories_, chapter 3A.

Look at the stuff in Ademek, et. al to finish this.

---

In general, whenever we have a "category valued" functor, we probably want 
to work with some 2-categorical interpretation. 

After all, one of the original motivations for category theory was the 
ability to express things that are inverses, but only up to isomorphism.

Give the example of category of natural numbers with matrices, and vector spaces.
To build the functor from $\mathbb{N}$ to $\mathsf{Vect}$ we need to _choose_
a vector space of each dimension, but there's LOTS of choices! They key is
that they're all isomorphic. So even though $fgV \neq V$, we always have 
$fgV \cong V$. Moreover, these isomorphisms "cohere" in a way that makes them
compatible with all the linear maps! So even though we don't get equality 
on-the-nose, we get something that's basically just as good.

This is why the "right" notion of sameness for categories is _equivalence_,
not _isomorphism_ (which would require $fgV = V$)[^1].

BUt now let's look at the functor between theories and models. To get an 
equivalence of categories, we would need to show that 
$\mathsf{Th} \mathsf{Mod} \mathbb{T} \cong \mathbb{T}$.

Of course, this is false in general! We're merely guranteed that 
these two categories are _equivalent_, that is
$\mathsf{Th} \mathsf{Mod} \mathbb{T} \simeq \mathbb{T}$!

Again, though, these equivalences "cohere" in a way that makes them 
consistent with functors between the theories -- up to natural isomorphism.

Just as we required categories in order to organize the data of the 
"sameness up to isomorphism" phenomenon of sets, we require 2-categories to
organize the data of "sameness up to equivalence", or more poetically,
"sameness up to (sameness up to isomorphism)", for categories[^2]!

---

Give the example of sheaves in algebraic geometry. 
A single sheaf is a functor from open sets to $\mathsf{Ab}$ (say)
which satisfies a gluing condition (write this down).

But we can soup this up, and say that the _category_ of sheaves is a functor
from open sets to $\mathfrak{Cat}$ which satisfies a gluing condition
(write this down. cf. Vakil 2.5.D and 2.5.5).

In fact, the notion of [stack][] in algebraic geometry exists, in part,
to make this idea precise!


---

Say something about (strict) 2-limits?

---

Sign off.


---

[^1]:
    Of course, sometimes isomorphism of categories _is_ what we want! 
    For instance, when we're viewing our category as an algebraic structure.

    I'm currently writing a blog post about the various lenses through which
    we can view categories, and I'll talk a bit more about this in that post.

[^2]:
    Say something about sets being "0-categories".

[^3]:
    Milnor's book _absolutely_ lives up to the hype! It's like...
    really really good, haha. I'm also skimming Scoville's 
    _Discrete Morse Theory_ on the side because I know it's been really
    useful in computer science and combinatorics, and I wanted to haer
    more about it.

    It's _also_ really good, and it's a pretty easy skim. It's aimed at 
    undergraduates, and this definitely informed my choice. So far I haven't
    seen many applications of the theory, but I'm hoping the latter half of the
    book says something about it, because I probably won't have time to read 
    other references anytime soon.

[^4]:
    I have a blog post in the works where I talk about all the different 
    ways we can view a category. One of the ways is geometric, where
    our objects are "points" and our arrows are "paths".

[^5]:
    At least, not usually! If we want to think of a category as an 
    algebraic gadget (after all, a category is "just" a model of some 
    essentially algebraic theory) then isomorphism _is_ the right 
    notion! 

    Typically, though, we want equivalence.

[^6]:
    Or class, or whatever. I'll be following the usual tradition of
    ignoring size issues in this post.

[^7]:
    Of course, we can consider models in _any_ category with the relevant
    structure, but it should come as no surprise that the $\mathsf{Set}$-valued
    models play a special role in the theory.

[^8]:
    For historical reasons to do with homological algebra, finite limit 
    functors are often called "lex", short for "left exact". 

[1]: https://mastodon.lol/@hallasurvivor
[2]: https://sites.google.com/view/brian-collier/home
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_theory
[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symplectic_geometry
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fukaya_category
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluedo
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_logic
[8]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/strict+2-category
[9]: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/BFb0063101
[10]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/geometric+transformation
[11]: /2022/08/21/monoidal-monoidoidoids.html
[12]: /2021/09/07/examples-of-sns-theorems.html
[13]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/essentially+algebraic+theory
[14]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/locally+finitely+presentable+category
[15]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/filtered+limit
[16]: https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/compact+object
[17]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finitely_generated_module#Finitely_presented_module
