---
layout: post
title: A truly incredible fact about the number 37
tags:
  - 
---

So I was on math stackexchange the other day, and I saw [a cute post][1] 
looking for a book which lists, for many many integers, facts that Ramanujan 
could have told Hardy if he'd take a cab other than [1729][2]. A few days ago 
OP answered their own question, saying that the book in question was 
[_Those Fascinating Numbers_][3] by Jean-Marie De Koninck. I decided to take 
a glance through it to see what kinds of facts lie inside 
(and also to see _just_ how many integers are covered!). Not only was I 
overwhelmed by the number of integers and the number of facts about them, 
the _preface_ already includes one of the single wildest facts I've ever heard, 
and I have to talk about it here! Here's a direct quote from the preface:

> 37, the median value for the second prime factor of an integer; 
> thus the probability that the second prime factor of an integer 
> chosen at random is smaller than 37 is approximately $\frac{1}{2}$;

My jaw was on the floor when I read this, haha. First it sounded totally 
unbelievable, since 37 is a tiny number in the grand scheme of things. Then 
it started to sound slightly more plausible... After all, about half of all 
integers have $2$ as their smallest prime factor. It makes sense that smaller 
primes should be more frequent among the smallest factors of numbers! But then 
I thought "how can you possibly _prove_ this!?". I'm not much of an analytic 
number theorist[^1], but I know that they have good estimates on a lot of 
facts like this. I decided it would be fun to try and find and understand a 
proof of this fact, and also write some [sage][4] code to test it!

So then let's go ahead and do it ^_^

---

First, I think, the sage code. I want to know if this really works!

"Obvoiusly" there's no uniform distribution on the natural numbers, so 
what does it even mean to choose a "random" one? The way the number theorists 
usually solve this problem is by fixing a large number $N$ and looking at 
the probabilities when you pick a random number between $1$ and $N$. Then you 
look at the $N \to \infty$ limit of these probabilities.

So for us, we'll want to first fix a large number $N$ and then work with 
numbers $\leq N$. For $N$ kind of small, we can just find the second prime 
factor of ecah number $\leq N$ and _check_ the median!

<div class="auto">
<script type="text/x-sage">

def getSecondSmallestFactors(N):
    data = []
    for n in range(1, N):
        fs = factor(n)
        if len(fs) > 1:
            second_smallest = fs[1][0]
            data += [second_smallest]
        else:
            # If there's only one prime factor
            # say the second prime factor is infinity
            data += [oo]
    
    return data

@interact
def _(N=input_box(10^5, width=10, label="$N$")):
    data = getSecondSmallestFactors(N)

    med = numpy.median(data)
    show("median second prime: ")
    show(med)
    show("")

    below37 = len([d for d in data if d <= 37]) / N
    show("fraction of numbers whose second prime is at most 37: ")
    show(below37.n())
    show("")
</script>
</div>

When I first ran this code, it honestly felt like magic, haha. What the 
_hell_ is going on here!?

---

The key idea, found in a paper of De Koninck and Tenenbaum[^2], 
is that we can compute the density of numbers whose second prime is $p$ 
(which the authors denote $\lambda_2(p)$) by cleverly using the ideas in the
[Sieve of Eratosthenes][7]!

Let's do a simple example to start. What fraction of numbers have $5$ as 
their second prime? In the language of the paper, what is $\lambda_2(5)$?

Well it's not hard to see that the numbers whose second prime is $5$ are 
those numbers whose prime factorization looks like

$$2^a 3^0 5^b \cdots$$

or 

$$2^0 3^a 5^b \cdots$$

so we need to count the density of numbers of these forms.

But a number is of the first form ($2^a 3^0 5^b \cdots$) if and only if 
it has a factor of $2$, a factor of $5$, and _no_ factors of $3$. 

<div class=boxed markdown=1>
TODO: picture of a bunch of integers, covered by 3 colors 
showing which of the above things are allowable.

We keep exactly the integers covered by all 3.
</div>

In the above image, the blue numbers have a factor of $2$, 
the orange numbers have a factor of $5$, and the (TODO: color 3) 
numbers _don't_ have a factor of $3$. 

It should be intuitive that $\frac{1}{2}$ the numbers are blue, 
$\frac{1}{5}$ are orange, and $\frac{2}{3}$ are (TODO: color 3). 
So taken together, 
$\frac{1}{2} \cdot \frac{1}{5} \cdot \frac{2}{3} = \frac{1}{15}$ of numbers 
are of this form!

An entirely analogous argument shows that 
$\left ( 1 - \frac{1}{2} \right ) \cdot \frac{1}{3} \cdot \frac{1}{5} = \frac{1}{30}$ 
of numbers are of the second form.

It's easy to see that these sets are disjoint, so their densities add, and 
$\frac{1}{15} + \frac{1}{30} = \frac{1}{10}$ numbers have $5$ as their 
second smallest factor!

TODO: now do the general case for $\lambda_2(p)$. 

<div class=boxed markdown=1>
TODO: 
Mention as an exercise
the formula given in the paper. Can you prove this formula is correct[^3]? 

</div>

But remember the goal of all this! We want to know the prime $p^*$ so that 
half of all numbers have their second prime $\leq p^*$. That is, so that 
the sum of densities 
$\lambda_2(2) + \lambda_2(3) + \lambda_2(5) + \ldots + \lambda_2(p^*) \approx \frac{1}{2}$.

Now it's easy to implement $\lambda_2(p)$ and check!

<div class="auto">
<script type="text/x-sage">
def lambda2(p):
    """
    Compute the density of the set of n whose 2nd prime is p.
    See equation (1.3) in Koninck and Tenenbaum, 2002
    """

    s = 0
    out = 1

    for q in Primes():
        if q >= p:
            break
        out *= (1 - (1/q))

    for q in Primes():
        if q >= p:
            break
        s += (1/q) * (1 - (1/q))^(-1)

    out *= s
    out *= 1/p 

    return out

total = 0
for p in Primes():
    if total > 0.5: break

    l = lambda2(p)
    total += l

    show("{} of numbers have {} as their second prime".format(l.n(),p))
    show("so {} of numbers have second prime at most {}".format(total.n(), p))
    show("")
</script>
</div>

Again we see that $37$ is the prime where roughly half of all numbers 
have something $\leq 37$ as their first prime! So we've proven that 
$37$ is the median second prime!

Also, this shows that we expect the actual density to be $\approx .5002$. 
If we set $N = 10^7$ in the code from the first half[^4]
to get a better approximation, we get $.5002501$, which is _remarkably_ 
close to the truth!

---

In the entry for $37$ in _Those Fascinating Integers_, De Koninck 
mentions this 2002 paper by himself and Tenenbaum, saying they moreover 
prove an asymptotic formula for the median $k$th prime number $p_k^*$:

$$
\log \log p_k^* = k - b + O \left ( \frac{1}{\sqrt{k}} \right )
$$

where $b = \frac{1}{3} + \gamma - \sum_p \left ( \log ((1-1/p)^{-1}) - 1/p \right )$ 
and $\gamma$ is the [Euler-Mascheroni Constant][6].


---

[^1]: Absolutely the understatement of the year

[^2]:
    [_Sur la loi de répartition du k-ième facteur premier d'un entier_][5]

    Yes, this paper is in french, but it's really not _so_ hard to read, 
    especially with liberal use of google translate. Though if you want to 
    avoid reading it, I've done the hard work for you, and everything in this 
    blog post is in english.

[^3]:
    It might be helpful to remember a generating function trick that 
    shows up fairly often (for instance in [partitions][8] and the 
    [riemann zeta function][9]):

    $$
    \sum \frac{1}{n} = \prod_p \left ( 1 - \frac{1}{p} \right )^{-1}
    $$

    Don't worry that this sum diverges for now. Just take note of _why_ 
    these two sides are equal. You should expand each term of the right hand 
    side as a geometric series, then check what happens when you foil.

[^4]:
    (and run it locally, since factoring numbers that big takes so long
    that the online sagecell times out)

[1]: https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/4767549/the-book-youll-need-when-someone-came-up-with-a-random-car-plate-number/4790221#4790221
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1729_(number)
[3]: https://bookstore.ams.org/mbk-64
[4]: https://sagemath.org
[5]: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305004102005972
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler%27s_constant
[7]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes
[8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_function_(number_theory)
[9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_zeta_function
